---
title: 'Class notes: Mastering Git'
date: 2019-01-26
layout: layouts/post.njk
category: tech
tags:
    - code
    - git
---

These are my class notes to [Paolo Perrotta](https://twitter.com/nusco)'s excellent and entertaining video course *[Mastering Git](https://app.pluralsight.com/library/courses/mastering-git)*, comprising 8 videos of 2 hours 45 minutes total. I recently took up the [Microsoft Dev Collective](https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/collective)'s offer for a 30-day free trial of [Pluralsight](https://www.pluralsight.com/) and this was one of several that I enjoyed. I highly recommend this course if you are familiar with git, but even a little unclear on how git works. Especially if, like me, you use the same git commands every day with only a vague notion of what they do. Signore Perrotta explains everything brilliantly.

git tracks changes in 4 places:

- *working directory* - this is the project directory in the OS file structure
- *index* - a.k.a the staging area
- *repository* - in the `.git` directory
- *stash* - a kind of scratch pad or clipboard for the developer

2 questions which will completely define and explain any command:

- How does this command move information across the 4 areas?
- How does this command change the repository?

Some useful git log commands:

- `git log --graph --decorate --oneline`
- `git log --patch`
- `git log -- <filename>`

Distributed Workflow patterns. This is the social side of git: how git users on a team use it. These are useful terms for fruitful discussion.

- Distribution models: how sourcecode is shared among repositories
    - Peer-to-peer: developers pulling from each other's repositories
    - Centralized: one repository holds the canonical version
    - Pull-request model: devs do not push directly, but request
    - hierarchical model: some devs are gatekeepers to canonical repositories
    - etc.
- Branching models: how branches are used
    - Stable versus unstable (does a branch allow broken code?)
    - Integration (is there a "master" branch to which all repos merge/rebase?)
    - Release branch
    - Feature branch
    - Hotfix branch (versus cherry-pick, which is a rebase)
- Constraints: allowed, disallowed and preferred methods
    - Merge versus rebase (messy truth versus clean inaccuracy)
    - Gatekeeping and responsibility (do some devs have privs)
    - "Don't push when the build is broken" (CI error)
    - clean history before push to integration?
    - Every pull request linked to an issue/ticket number

Gitflow: such an [influential model](https://nvie.com/posts/a-successful-git-branching-model/) deserves separate discussion

- Don't "just use Gitflow". It is not optimal for every project, e.g.:
    - web apps that need to maintain only one release branch
    - project with continuous integration in which features released immediately, Gitflow has too many layers
    - projects with long term feature development
        - large code bases touching everywhere could cause integration headaches
        - perhaps better to integrate often, even when features are not yet complete

Growing a workflow: Avoid designing a complete workflow from the beginning, but start small and grow it.

- Sample starter workflow:
    - Distribution model: Centralized
    - Branching model:
        - One integration branch (master)
        - One feature branch per feature
    - Constraints:
        - Keep master stable, fix ASAP if it breaks
        - Integrate feature branches every few days
        - User merge over rebase by default

  "Simple, clear purpose and principles give rise to complex intelligent behavior. Complex rules and regulations give rise to simple stupid behavior."

  -- Dee Hock

Personal thoughts:

- Other constraints I have seen:
- Merge feature branches into the master branch, but clean up with interactive rebase the history of the branch before doing so.
- Do not rebase the history of the master branch.
- Features that are not released yet should be hidden by default, to be turned on with an internal flag
- Branches should have an associated issue number, and commit messages should reference that number (required a githook to enforce)