---
title: 'Problem: Typescript adds Object.defineProperty(exports, "__esModule", { value: true });'
date: 2019-01-14
layout: layouts/post.njk
tags:
  - code
  - typescript
---

You're using Typescript in a frontend project, and import a module into your code. Something like:
`import { Observable } from 'rxjs';`

You're using a bundler like [_Webpack_](https://webpack.js.org) that squeezes those modules into a single minimized javascript file, so you want to keep that line as-is.

However, when Typescript compiles into javascript, it adds the line `Object.defineProperty(exports, "__esModule", { value: true });` which causes an error `Uncaught ReferenceError: exports is not defined` or something similar in your browser's console.

You search for solutions, but everyone is talking about using [_RequireJS_](https://requirejs.org/) like it's 2014!

You want to get rid of this unwanted `Object.defineProperty` line but leave the rest of your code untouched.

Solution: Modify these two lines in your `tsconfig.json` to the following:
`"module": "es6",`
`"lib": ["dom","es6"]`

Explanation:

- `commonjs` (the current Typescript default) or one of the other suggested options assumes you are writing a `Node.js` application, or
- that you will use a module loader (like _RequireJS_) which loads files into your web application at runtime.
- `es6` is a working standard that will keep your `import` line intact.
- But `es6` assumes you are importing from a javascript file (e.g. `import { this } from './that.js'`).
- However, you are using a package manager, you hipster, and that module is not in an external javascript file, but is sitting in a `node_modules` directory somewhere waiting for your package bundler to roll it on up.
- Typescript sees the `es6` module style, but not the `es6` lib, and so believes you are loading an external javascript file. This is why you need to add the `es6` to `lib:`
- But once you enable `lib:`, the browser-specific code in your typescript will break without the `dom` library, so you need to add that, too.

Step-by-step: Still need help? Follow these instructions:

1. _If you do not have a `tsconfig.json`:_ In your project directory, type `tsc --init`
1. In the `tsconfig.json` file, find the line starting `module:` and change its value to `es6` like so: `"module": "es6"`
1. Further down, find the line starting `lib:` and add `dom` and `es6` to the array, like so: `"lib": ["dom","es6"]`. Make sure to uncomment it if necessary.

More info:

- [The `tsconfig.json` schema](http://json.schemastore.org/tsconfig) contains all of the options for every key-value pair, including:
- Current `module` options (one of): `"commonjs", "amd", "umd", "system", "es6", "es2015", "esnext",` or `"none"`
- Current `lib` options (any combination of): `"es5", "es6", "es2015", "es7", "es2016", "es2017", "es2018", "esnext", "dom", "dom.iterable", "webworker", "scripthost", "es2015.core", "es2015.collection", "es2015.generator", "es2015.iterable", "es2015.promise", "es2015.proxy", "es2015.reflect", "es2015.symbol", "es2015.symbol.wellknown", "es2016.array.include", "es2017.object", "es2017.intl", "es2017.sharedmemory", "es2017.string", "es2017.typedarrays", "es2018.intl", "es2018.promise", "es2018.regexp", "esnext.asynciterable", "esnext.array", "esnext.intl", "esnext.symbol"`
