---
title: My Finland, My Blog
date: 2021-02-05
layout: layouts/post.njk
category: meta
tags:
- finland
- meta
---

I have lived now in Finland for nearly 7-and-a-half years! That's a long time. Longer than I expected when I arrived here from New York City. It's probably time to admit to myself that I'm not going anywhere.

This understanding mandates a shift in mindset in my relationship to this land and its culture.

I know enough to get by. I have _suku_, or ancestry, here. I have close friends. I have _perhe_, family. I have a career that supports me. I've never experienced culture shock. I know the rough outline of Finnish history.

My Finnish language skill is adequate for getting through basic situations. I have met Anglophone immigrants living here longer than I, some of them for over 3 decades, some Americans, who aggressively speak no Finnish at all. Now *that* takes a level of dedication that is impressive in its own way.

Still, my *adequate* knowledge has been a barrier to deeper understanding. I cannot yet hold an extended conversation in Finnish. I couldn't tell you anything about contemporary Finnish literature. I tend to avoid reading notices written in Finnish. I'm expressing all of this in relation to the Finnish *language* but this of course extends to *culture* and *society*. There are depths that I'm not accessing.

My blog itself has languished. A public presence is unsettling to me. I'm not a performer. I do not aspire to be perceived as a thought-leader. I have a sense of humor which gets me in trouble. When programming, I tend to solve the problem at hand, write a few notes and then move on. I like things to be neatly complete. My writing is stilted, using too many big words.

However, I think I can *use* this blog, this resource, to bolster my learning, about Finnish language and culture, or anything, really. If I can write about something, explain it, then I can absorb it.

To that end, I present a new tag, [_finland_](/tags/finland), that will be thoughts and writing about this land in which I find myself, of pine-forests, lakes, and quiet, earnest people. I will definitely continue to write about any tech topics that strike my fancy, but not only.
